# 2023/2024 Beekeeping Season

## To Do

- [ ] bring paint
- [ ] bring wood filler
- [ ] bring porter bee escapes
- [x] bring QE

## Hive Record

### New Beeland

#### 11-06-2023

Unfortunately quite a discouraging inspection. I wasn't able to see any eggs, but I think I spotted the queen. I have
decided to leave it as is for the moment, and we'll see what I find on the next inspection. They have taken down some of
the syrup I gave them, but not loads. (Note: need to check this is the correct colony name - it's the one next to
Mozambeeque.)

#### 29-05-2023

I have started feeding them, which will hopefully boost numbers.

#### 27-05-2023

I have collected a swarm from Trumpington (Foster Road), who are settled in as the new New Beeland. Their queen is
marked (yellow) so I can only assume I have stolen someone's bees. The swarm was in a pile on the ground, which seems a
little weird, but I guess it takes all sorts to make a world.

### Puerto Beeco

#### 11-06-2023

I didn't see the queen, but I can see new eggs! So this is good news, and suggests they are settling in to their new
home. They still have a feeder on, with a bit of syrup still available.

#### 29-05-2023

I have found the queen, which is a great relief. This made me regret moving over eggs from Mozembeeque, but I have left
it as is. I have managed to get the queen excluder in the correct position, with the queen in the box below.

#### 27-05-2023

I had a quick look in, and unfortunately I can't see the queen. The swarm seems quite small, so I have moved over a
frame of eggs from Mozembeeque. I don't know if a swarm can make a new queen, but maybe the eggs will be able to boost
numbers. I am also feeding them.

#### 23-05-2023

I have collected a swarm (my first!) from Huntingdon Road. They were inconveniently in a bush, but have been established
as the new Puerto Beeco.

### The Beehamas

### 11-06-2023

I did not manage to see either a new queen or eggs. However, the hive is very active and I have several full supers! I
moved over two frames of brood. I have three supers, one of which I took off three frames of capped honey (replacing
with foundation) and one of which I need to clear out with porter bee escapes.

#### 11-05-2023

I have made a split from Mozambeeque. I had developing queen cells, but quite early on, so I'm expecting that I can look
back in the hive 11-06-2023.

### Mozambeeque

### 11-06-2023

Mozembeeque continues to be the golden child. I counted six good frames of brood, two of which I moved over to the
Beehamas. I'd prefer not to move any more brood frames out of Mozambeeque to make sure they can get really strong for
the biggest honey flow.

#### 27-05-2023

Graça is laying eggs and the brood I moved are developing well. I still have a ways for them to draw out all the comb in
the brood box. I managed to get a queen excluder on and to make sure she's in the brood box. I counted six frames of
brood, one of which I moved to Puerto Beeco as I wasn't sure they had a queen.

#### 11-05-2023

I have split Mozambeeque. Ideally I would have waited a little longer but as I'm going on holiday for 11 days it's kind
of non-negotiable. I took three very nice frames to the new Mozambeeque, along with the queen, and removed any play
cups. I don't think any were charged, but better safe than sorry. I would have liked to have more frames of bees before
splitting, or at least more developed queen cells, but I think if I don't do something I run a high risk of my lovely
queen swarming. I didn't have a queen excluder, which is annoying, so it's very likely the queen will move up into the
super above. That having been said, I'd rather she continues to lay, even if it's not really where I want, then that she
rejects the hive. I also moved the signs so that Graça can move with Mozambeeque.

#### 07-05-2023

The colony is looking very strong. Unfortunately not quite enough brood for me to split, but the frames with brood were
almost completely full. I did see one charged queen cup, but it was just an egg in a cup. I think a split would be
better later on in the week. The trouble will really be dealing with the weather, which is scheduled to be quite wet.
I'm also off on holiday next weekend, which is tricky. I think the best thing to do is probably to try for a mid-week
split and not bother with swapping where the new hive goes from one side of the original hive stand to the other.

#### 22-04-2023

My first proper inspection of the year. I can see that the queen laid eggs over where the queen excluder now sits, but
she is comfortably in her deep box under the QE. I unfortunately had to remove some of the drone brood she laid in the
supers, as the super frames couldn't fit together quite right. I can also see that, in the higher supers, they are
trying to make queen cells! Very useful for making split in future; I assume the queen pheromone doesn't reach that far.
I took down all the queen cells and tried to put all the brood together to make things easier for the nurse bees. I
think that caused more harm than good, so I probably wouldn't do it again.

The queen has plenty of space to lay in her deep box, so I'm hoping she will make use of that in the coming week. If I'm
lucky, I should be able to make a split in maybe two weeks.

#### 15-04-2023

I have added a queen excluder and a third super of empty comb, because I have loads of nice super frames from last
season. The bees look to be in very good shape and have taken over the added frames of honey quite nicely. I can see the
queen, and she is laying well.

#### 08-04-2023

Despite going into winter as my smallest colony, Mozambeeque is the only one to have made it through. It had one brood
box and one super of honey. I have added a second super of honey from other colonies to kickstart its progress. I also
signed up to collect swarms in the hopes I can replace some of my losses.

## Overwintering

Overwintering was unfortunately a very sad affair, with 3 of 4 hives dying. After a careful inspection of the hives that
didn't survive, I came to a few conclusions

1. I allowed my two large hives (New Beeland and the Beehamas) to become honey bound. I counted on the queens moving
   upward to fill available frames, but both hives were absolutely full of honey when I went to inspect them. They had
   plenty of bees on them when they went into winter, so there's no reason they should have died. My conclusion is that
   the queens just didn't move up to the available space, and the cluster became too small. In future, I would leave
   more free space below and less honey. However, it was recommended to me to leave the outermost frames as honey, which
   can act as an insulator.
2. I didn't condense my two large hives down as far as I should have. I reasoned that a tree doesn't get smaller in
   winter, but this seems to have been a bad plan.
3. I lost a small colony (Puerto Beeco) very late in the winter / early in the spring due to an unfortunate cold snap. I
   think if the colony had been a little larger, or the temperature a little kinder they would have done better. I want
   to insulate my hives better for winter in future.

I checked the frames of all lost colonies for any sign of disease but couldn't find any. The nicest frames of honey I
have cleaned off for re-use. I appreciate that a more diligent beekeeper would treat them as a disease risk, but I am
fairly confident they are in good shape and have been using them to build up Mozambeeque in the spring.