# 2023 Beekeeping Season

## Overwintering

Overwintering was unfortunately a very sad affair, with 3 of 4 hives dying. After a careful inspection of the hives that
didn't survive, I came to a few conclusions

1. I allowed my two large hives (New Beeland and the Beehamas) to become honey bound. I counted on the queens moving
   upward to fill available frames, but both hives were absolutely full of honey when I went to inspect them. They had
   plenty of bees on them when they went into winter, so there's no reason they should have died. My conclusion is that
   the queens just didn't move up to the available space, and the cluster became too small. In future, I would leave
   more free space below and less honey. However, it was recommended to me to leave the outermost frames as honey, which
   can act as an insulator.
2. I didn't condense my two large hives down as far as I should have. I reasoned that a tree doesn't get smaller in
   winter, but this seems to have been a bad plan.
3. I lost a small colony (Puerto Beeco) very late in the winter / early in the spring due to an unfortunate cold snap. I
   think if the colony had been a little larger, or the temperature a little kinder they would have done better. I want
   to insulate my hives better for winter in future.

I checked the frames of all lost colonies for any sign of disease but couldn't find any. The nicest frames of honey I
have cleaned off for re-use. I appreciate that a more diligent beekeeper would treat them as a disease risk, but I am
fairly confident they are in good shape and have been using them to build up Mozambeeque in the spring.

### Mozambeeque

To Do
- [ ] bring paint for other hives

#### 08-20-2023

Despite going into winter as my smallest colony, Mozambeeque is the only one to have made it through. It had one brood
box and one super of honey. I have added a second super of honey from other colonies to kickstart its progress. I also 
signed up to collect swarms in the hopes I can replace some of my losses.

#### 15-20-2023

I have added a queen excluder and a third super of empty comb, because I have loads of nice super frames from last
season. The bees look to be in very good shape and have taken over the added frames of honey quite nicely. I can see the
queen, and she is laying well.

### 22-20-2023

My first proper inspection of the year. I can see that the queen laid eggs over where the queen excluder now sits, but
she is comfortably in her deep box under the QE. I unfortunately had to remove some of the drone brood she laid in the
supers, as the super frames couldn't fit together quite right. I can also see that, in the higher supers, they are
trying to make queen cells! Very useful for making split in future; I assume the queen pheromone doesn't reach that far.
I took down all the queen cells and tried to put all the brood together to make things easier for the nurse bees. I
think that caused more harm than good, so I probably wouldn't do it again.

The queen has plenty of space to lay in her deep box, so I'm hoping she will make use of that in the coming week. If I'm
lucky, I should be able to make a split in maybe two weeks.